learning-notes/containers/docker/README.md, before:

# Docker
>Why should I learn docker after all this is mostly done by OPS people.
> 
> *The best developers understand ops and The best ops understand developers.*

- labs.play-with-docker.com provides 4 hour docker instances.

Docker helps with environment consistency.

## Introduction

Docker is language agnostic, meaning any language or package is good to go with docker. It does not care about the it.

Any application might specify the port it listens hence we should be careful binding ports when starting docker containers

> *Dockerfile*
>
> Is set of instructions to build application and its dependencies inside a container.

> *Image vs Container*
>
>Images are buildtime constructs and containers are runtime constructs. Hence an image makes a VM template.

An image of a container has a layered file system, such as a stack of books and every book is different part of a story.

`$ sudo docker container run -d --name web -p 8080:8080 sbecerek/container:latest`

Above is an example of running docker container as background service (`-d`) this command returns the id of container `59a43ff3decd0de389a18a29bad852d79cc00a4a078414f23283ad61f3952a97` this could be verified with 
`sudo docker container ls`

```mermaid
graph TD;
    docker-->image;
    docker-->container;
```
Above is not the whole syntax tree of the docker however it is important to grasp the idea of image and container. An image is a static snapshot of an application's code and dependencies, while a container is a running instance of that image that includes the application and any runtime dependencies.

- `Containerized App` - An application that runs inside a container.

We may stop, start, kill etc. a container. for example `docker container stop <name>/<id>` sends a SIGTERM signal to the container.

Unless we `rm` the container it is there to be removed.

`docker container run -it --name test alpine sh` runs a shell inside a container, `exit`ing the shell causes container to be killed since main container is killed in a Linux environment. Instead we should use `Ctrl+P+Q` to detach terminal from contianer.

>*Cloud Native Microservices* - Nigel
> 
>That different features of an app break them apart and code them independently.
>
> Allows independently scaling, patching and modifying a single part.


>*Docker Swarm Cluster* 
>
> Cluster of Containers that Comprises of managers and workers.
>Managers host the control plane features, scheduling and consisting the state of the cluster

Docker desktop can still run in a swarm mode.

Running at swarm mode enables the `docker service`s. We may deploy apps and achieve microservices like this.

There is a reconciliation loop in the cluster that checks if observed state is matching the desired state, in a case we want 10 instances and observed state sees 7 instances it launches new containers.

- Swarm or Cluster does not support building apps on the deploy time. We may use `docker stack` command to deploy our docker compose file.

## Dockerfiles
Always the first instruction we define in a docker file is `FROM` (`FROM node:alpine`) instruction.

Next instruction could be metadate with `LABEL` instruction.

We can also define environment variables with `ENV`.

When running a base image like Node or ASP.NET, it is important to specify the `WORKDIR` this is the directory our code lives in.

`COPY` instruction takes two arguments in case of `COPY . .` first dot represents execution directory and second dot represents path specififed in `WORKDIR`.

`EXPOSE` is port that will be exposed outside the container. This also should be the Internal port when running the container with `-p`
flag.

`ENTRYPOINT` tells what should be run to start the application.

- `docker rm` and `docker rmi` are different in first one removes containers latter one removes the images. One may also write `docker image/container rm`. 

> **Note**
>
> Keep in mind that not specifying `.dockerignore` might cause long build time due to copying of `node_modules` or other similar directories that contain packages.

> **Tip**
>
> VS Code Docker extension is very useful in providing intelisense for docker files and more...

> **Tip**
>
> Tagging an image with the latest all the time is not the best idea, we rather prefer to have some differences between versions.

Using `docker logs` we may look at the container logs.

Logs is an important idea for running containers, We may create a volum mount that is in the host. This will allow logs to be outputed there.

Similarly we may keep them in container. In case a crash this will 
be of no use.

`-v` tag to specify volume while running the container. 

Volumes are way to inject different things inside containers, how?

`docker run -p 8080:80 -v $(pwd):/usr/share/nginx/html nginx:alpine` is mounting current directory by `pwd` to nginx directory which has default html content, and serving custom html docs.

This may get complicated in ways that we are able to write to network locations.

## Communication

When we have multiple containers that need to talk to each other we may create a `bridge network`.

We may check documentation network drivers.

`docker network create --driver <driver_type> <network_name>` is used to create network for more information `docker network -h`

We may add any container into a network while running by adding the `--net=<name_of_network>` when running the container. `--name` becomes important in this case because this is simply the name of the host, for API and DB connection this is important.

Such network could be created using `docker-compose` in declarative way.

## Docker Compose
*This is the beginning to the K8s story*

>*Docker Compose*
>
>*Declarative*
>Describing the desired state of your application in a config file that you use to deploy and manage the app
> 
>A docker compose config file is such a file that does this.

Docker compose will manage lifecycle of the application from building images to orchestrating them.
with single command we can:
- Build Services (`docker-compose build`)
- Start Up Services (`docker-compose up`)
- Tear Down Services (`docker-compose down`)

Docker Compose files use YAML which are composed of `maps` and `lists`. First thing in a docker-compose file should be `version` this defines the syntax schema.

`services` are the containers we would like to run. We may also define `networks` for container communications.

Here are some key `service` properties:
- build - build properties
    
    - context - directory for service with dockerfile
    - dockerfile - incase different name is used for dockerfile
    - args - build arguments or environment variables 
- environment - runtime environment properties, could be ENV variables
- env - enviroment options supports files
- image - image name and tag 
- networks - network specifications
- ports - port mapping
- volumes - volume mounting

We may refer environment variables in our docker file `${my_var}`, this may be used to set different configuration for deployment environments.

`docker-compose down` will also remove the containers that were created, Images will remain.

We are able to push multiple images to a registry using `docker-compose push [service...]`. It will push all the services together.

*Now we will look in depth above properties*

### Orchestration
This section talks about "Starting up services" part of the docker compose.

We may have A database that APIs depend on and a Presentation App (Client) that depends on the APIs, compose allows orchestration of all these resources via the declarative syntax.

Includes:
- ports
- volumes
- environment
- networks

A service defined in compose file can have multiple ports specified with `ports` key it is better practice to put list objects in quotes 
```yml
ports:
  - "3000:3000"
```

Volumes as we discussed before a way to mount files in to docker image, Another key point to volumes is that its importance when containarizing a database in case the container shuts down unexpectedly it will cause loss of data.
```yml
volumes:
  - ./logs:/var/www/logs
```

Environment variables are important to have different versions of the an application hosted.
```yml
environment:
  - ENV=production
  - VERSION=1.0
```
In case we have a lot of Environment variables these are usually stored in .env files, we may specify whole file.
```yml
env_file:
  - ./common.env
  - ./settings.env
```

Thinking about the example we have given before for our services to communicate we need a network.
```yml
services:
  myservice:
      .
      .
      .
    networks:
      - app-net

networks:
  app-net:
    driver: bride
```

`depends_on` could be used in docker compose file to declare dependencies, It some cases it will be useful to start DB before app. 

Main commands to know about the containers are `docker-compose up` and `docker-compose down` adding `-h` flag to it could improve the efficiency of work greatly.

`docker-compose logs [...services]` allows to view logs for a specified services or whole composed apps even if they are borught up with -d switch.

`docker-compose exec <serviceName> <shell>` will allow viewing logs for a service.

`--scale` allows scaling a service however we need to modify the ports mapping since we will have multiple container one-to-one mapping will not work 
```
ports:
  - "3000"
```
Will work.

We also can't use container_name property. Declaratively we may scale container using the `deploy` property of a service.

Commit message:

container notes from a.cloud.guru

learning-notes/containers/docker/README.md, after:

# [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)

Docker is a `container runtime`, a  `container runtime` is a software that is designed to implement and run support containers.

There are also other container runtimes:
- [containerd](https://containerd.io/) lacks some features of docker however when paired with kubernetes it is a good choice.
- 
>Why should I learn docker after all this is mostly done by OPS people.
> 
> *The best developers understand ops and The best ops understand developers.*

- [labs.play-with-docker.com](labs.play-with-docker.com) provides 4 hour docker instances.

Docker helps with environment consistency.

## Introduction

Docker is language agnostic, meaning any language or package is good to go with docker. It does not care about the it.

Any application might specify the port it listens hence we should be careful binding ports when starting docker containers

> *Dockerfile*
>
> Is set of instructions to build application and its dependencies inside a container.

> *Image vs Container*
>
>Images are buildtime constructs and containers are runtime constructs. Hence an image makes a VM template.

An image of a container has a layered file system, such as a stack of books and every book is different part of a story.

`$ sudo docker container run -d --name web -p 8080:8080 sbecerek/container:latest`

Above is an example of running docker container as background service (`-d`) this command returns the id of container `59a43ff3decd0de389a18a29bad852d79cc00a4a078414f23283ad61f3952a97` this could be verified with 
`sudo docker container ls`

```mermaid
graph TD;
    docker-->image;
    docker-->container;
```
Above is not the whole syntax tree of the docker however it is important to grasp the idea of image and container. An image is a static snapshot of an application's code and dependencies, while a container is a running instance of that image that includes the application and any runtime dependencies.

- `Containerized App` - An application that runs inside a container.

We may stop, start, kill etc. a container. for example `docker container stop <name>/<id>` sends a SIGTERM signal to the container.

Unless we `rm` the container it is there to be removed.

`docker container run -it --name test alpine sh` runs a shell inside a container, `exit`ing the shell causes container to be killed since main container is killed in a Linux environment. Instead we should use `Ctrl+P+Q` to detach terminal from contianer.

>*Cloud Native Microservices* - Nigel
> 
>That different features of an app break them apart and code them independently.
>
> Allows independently scaling, patching and modifying a single part.


>*Docker Swarm Cluster* 
>
> Cluster of Containers that Comprises of managers and workers.
>Managers host the control plane features, scheduling and consisting the state of the cluster

Docker desktop can still run in a swarm mode.

Running at swarm mode enables the `docker service`s. We may deploy apps and achieve microservices like this.

There is a reconciliation loop in the cluster that checks if observed state is matching the desired state, in a case we want 10 instances and observed state sees 7 instances it launches new containers.

- Swarm or Cluster does not support building apps on the deploy time. We may use `docker stack` command to deploy our docker compose file.

## Dockerfiles
Always the first instruction we define in a docker file is `FROM` (`FROM node:alpine`) instruction.

Next instruction could be metadate with `LABEL` instruction.

We can also define environment variables with `ENV`.

When running a base image like Node or ASP.NET, it is important to specify the `WORKDIR` this is the directory our code lives in.

`COPY` instruction takes two arguments in case of `COPY . .` first dot represents execution directory and second dot represents path specififed in `WORKDIR`.

`EXPOSE` is port that will be exposed outside the container. This also should be the Internal port when running the container with `-p`
flag.

`ENTRYPOINT` tells what should be run to start the application.

- `docker rm` and `docker rmi` are different in first one removes containers latter one removes the images. One may also write `docker image/container rm`. 

> **Note**
>
> Keep in mind that not specifying `.dockerignore` might cause long build time due to copying of `node_modules` or other similar directories that contain packages.

> **Tip**
>
> VS Code Docker extension is very useful in providing intelisense for docker files and more...

> **Tip**
>
> Tagging an image with the latest all the time is not the best idea, we rather prefer to have some differences between versions.

Using `docker logs` we may look at the container logs.

Logs is an important idea for running containers, We may create a volum mount that is in the host. This will allow logs to be outputed there.

Similarly we may keep them in container. In case a crash this will 
be of no use.

`-v` tag to specify volume while running the container. 

Volumes are way to inject different things inside containers, how?

`docker run -p 8080:80 -v $(pwd):/usr/share/nginx/html nginx:alpine` is mounting current directory by `pwd` to nginx directory which has default html content, and serving custom html docs.

This may get complicated in ways that we are able to write to network locations.

## Communication

When we have multiple containers that need to talk to each other we may create a `bridge network`.

We may check documentation network drivers.

`docker network create --driver <driver_type> <network_name>` is used to create network for more information `docker network -h`

We may add any container into a network while running by adding the `--net=<name_of_network>` when running the container. `--name` becomes important in this case because this is simply the name of the host, for API and DB connection this is important.

Such network could be created using `docker-compose` in declarative way.

## Docker Compose
*This is the beginning to the K8s story*

>*Docker Compose*
>
>*Declarative*
>Describing the desired state of your application in a config file that you use to deploy and manage the app
> 
>A docker compose config file is such a file that does this.

Docker compose will manage lifecycle of the application from building images to orchestrating them.
with single command we can:
- Build Services (`docker-compose build`)
- Start Up Services (`docker-compose up`)
- Tear Down Services (`docker-compose down`)

Docker Compose files use YAML which are composed of `maps` and `lists`. First thing in a docker-compose file should be `version` this defines the syntax schema.

`services` are the containers we would like to run. We may also define `networks` for container communications.

Here are some key `service` properties:
- build - build properties
    
    - context - directory for service with dockerfile
    - dockerfile - incase different name is used for dockerfile
    - args - build arguments or environment variables 
- environment - runtime environment properties, could be ENV variables
- env - enviroment options supports files
- image - image name and tag 
- networks - network specifications
- ports - port mapping
- volumes - volume mounting

We may refer environment variables in our docker file `${my_var}`, this may be used to set different configuration for deployment environments.

`docker-compose down` will also remove the containers that were created, Images will remain.

We are able to push multiple images to a registry using `docker-compose push [service...]`. It will push all the services together.

*Now we will look in depth above properties*

### Orchestration
This section talks about "Starting up services" part of the docker compose.

We may have A database that APIs depend on and a Presentation App (Client) that depends on the APIs, compose allows orchestration of all these resources via the declarative syntax.

Includes:
- ports
- volumes
- environment
- networks

A service defined in compose file can have multiple ports specified with `ports` key it is better practice to put list objects in quotes 
```yml
ports:
  - "3000:3000"
```

Volumes as we discussed before a way to mount files in to docker image, Another key point to volumes is that its importance when containarizing a database in case the container shuts down unexpectedly it will cause loss of data.
```yml
volumes:
  - ./logs:/var/www/logs
```

Environment variables are important to have different versions of the an application hosted.
```yml
environment:
  - ENV=production
  - VERSION=1.0
```
In case we have a lot of Environment variables these are usually stored in .env files, we may specify whole file.
```yml
env_file:
  - ./common.env
  - ./settings.env
```

Thinking about the example we have given before for our services to communicate we need a network.
```yml
services:
  myservice:
      .
      .
      .
    networks:
      - app-net

networks:
  app-net:
    driver: bride
```

`depends_on` could be used in docker compose file to declare dependencies, It some cases it will be useful to start DB before app. 

Main commands to know about the containers are `docker-compose up` and `docker-compose down` adding `-h` flag to it could improve the efficiency of work greatly.

`docker-compose logs [...services]` allows to view logs for a specified services or whole composed apps even if they are borught up with -d switch.

`docker-compose exec <serviceName> <shell>` will allow viewing logs for a service.

`--scale` allows scaling a service however we need to modify the ports mapping since we will have multiple container one-to-one mapping will not work 
```
ports:
  - "3000"
```
Will work.

We also can't use container_name property. Declaratively we may scale container using the `deploy` property of a service.
